How to Set a Goal
First consider what you want to achieve, and then commit to it. Set SMART (specific, measureable, attainable, relevant and time-bound) goals that motivate you and write them down to make them feel tangible. Then plan the steps you must take to realize your goal, and cross off each one as you work through them.

Goal setting is a powerful process for thinking about your ideal future, and for motivating yourself to turn your vision of this future into reality.

The process of setting goals helps you choose where you want to go in life. By knowing precisely what you want to achieve, you know where you have to concentrate your efforts. You'll also quickly spot the distractions that can, so easily, lead you astray.

Why Set Goals?
Top-level athletes, successful businesspeople and achievers in all fields all set goals. Setting goals gives you long-term vision and short-term motivation . It focuses your acquisition of knowledge, and helps you to organize your time and your resources so that you can make the most of your life.

By setting sharp, clearly defined goals, you can measure and take pride in the achievement of those goals, and you'll see forward progress in what might previously have seemed a long pointless grind. You will also raise your self-confidence , as you recognize your own ability and competence in achieving the goals that you've set.

Starting to Set Personal Goals
You set your goals on a number of levels:

First you create your "big picture" of what you want to do with your life (or over, say, the next 10 years), and identify the large-scale goals that you want to achieve.
Then, you break these down into the smaller and smaller targets that you must hit to reach your lifetime goals.
Finally, once you have your plan, you start working on it to achieve these goals.
This is why we start the process of setting goals by looking at your lifetime goals. Then, we work down to the things that you can do in, say, the next five years, then next year, next month, next week, and today, to start moving towards them.

Step 1: Setting Lifetime Goals
The first step in setting personal goals is to consider what you want to achieve in your lifetime (or at least, by a significant and distant age in the future). Setting lifetime goals gives you the overall perspective that shapes all other aspects of your decision making.

Free Workbook Offer
Increase your productivity and reduce stress with this FREE workbook when you join the Club before midnight, Aug 21.

Find Out More
To give a broad, balanced coverage of all important areas in your life, try to set goals in some of the following categories (or in other categories of your own, where these are important to you):

Career – What level do you want to reach in your career, or what do you want to achieve?
Financial – How much do you want to earn, by what stage? How is this related to your career goals?
Education – Is there any knowledge you want to acquire in particular? What information and skills will you need to have in order to achieve other goals?
Family – Do you want to be a parent? If so, how are you going to be a good parent? How do you want to be seen by a partner or by members of your extended family?
Artistic – Do you want to achieve any artistic goals?
Attitude – Is any part of your mindset holding you back? Is there any part of the way that you behave that upsets you? (If so, set a goal to improve your behavior or find a solution to the problem.)
Physical – Are there any athletic goals that you want to achieve, or do you want good health deep into old age? What steps are you going to take to achieve this?
Pleasure – How do you want to enjoy yourself? (You should ensure that some of your life is for you!)
Public Service – Do you want to make the world a better place? If so, how?
Spend some time brainstorming  these things, and then select one or more goals in each category that best reflect what you want to do. Then consider trimming again so that you have a small number of really significant goals that you can focus on.

As you do this, make sure that the goals that you have set are ones that you genuinely want to achieve, not ones that your parents, family, or employers might want. (If you have a partner, you probably want to consider what he or she wants – however, make sure that you also remain true to yourself!)

Tip:
You may also want to read our article on Personal Mission Statements . Crafting a personal mission statement can help bring your most important goals into sharp focus.

Step 2: Setting Smaller Goals
Once you have set your lifetime goals, set a five-year plan of smaller goals that you need to complete if you are to reach your lifetime plan.

Then create a one-year plan, six-month plan, and a one-month plan of progressively smaller goals that you should reach to achieve your lifetime goals. Each of these should be based on the previous plan.

Then create a daily To-Do List  of things that you should do today to work towards your lifetime goals.

At an early stage, your smaller goals might be to read books and gather information on the achievement of your higher level goals. This will help you to improve the quality and realism of your goal setting.

Finally, review your plans, and make sure that they fit the way in which you want to live your life.

Tip:
If you feel that you're not paying enough attention to certain areas of your life, you'll find our articles on The Wheel of Life  and the Life/Career Rainbow  useful.

Staying on Course
Once you've decided on your first set of goals, keep the process going by reviewing and updating your To-Do List on a daily basis.

Periodically review the longer term plans, and modify them to reflect your changing priorities and experience. (A good way of doing this is to schedule regular, repeating reviews using a computer-based diary.)

SMART Goals
A useful way of making goals more powerful is to use the SMART  mnemonic. While there are plenty of variants (some of which we've included in parenthesis), SMART usually stands for:

S – Specific (or Significant).
M – Measurable (or Meaningful).
A – Attainable (or Action-Oriented).
R – Relevant (or Rewarding).
T – Time-bound (or Trackable).
For example, instead of having "to sail around the world" as a goal, it's more powerful to use the SMART goal "To have completed my trip around the world by December 31, 2027." Obviously, this will only be attainable if a lot of preparation has been completed beforehand!

Further Tips for Setting Your Goals
The following broad guidelines will help you to set effective, achievable goals:

State each goal as a positive statement – Express your goals positively – "Execute this technique well" is a much better goal than "Don't make this stupid mistake."
Be precise – Set precise goals, putting in dates, times and amounts so that you can measure achievement. If you do this, you'll know exactly when you have achieved the goal, and can take complete satisfaction from having achieved it.
Set priorities – When you have several goals, give each a priority. This helps you to avoid feeling overwhelmed by having too many goals, and helps to direct your attention to the most important ones.
Write goals down – This crystallizes them and gives them more force.
Keep operational goals small – Keep the low-level goals that you're working towards small and achievable. If a goal is too large, then it can seem that you are not making progress towards it. Keeping goals small and incremental gives more opportunities for reward.
Set performance goals, not outcome goals – You should take care to set goals over which you have as much control as possible. It can be quite dispiriting to fail to achieve a personal goal for reasons beyond your control!

In business, these reasons could be bad business environments or unexpected effects of government policy. In sport, they could include poor judging, bad weather, injury, or just plain bad luck.

If you base your goals on personal performance, then you can keep control over the achievement of your goals, and draw satisfaction from them.

Set realistic goals – It's important to set goals that you can achieve. All sorts of people (for example, employers, parents, media, or society) can set unrealistic goals for you. They will often do this in ignorance of your own desires and ambitions.

It's also possible to set goals that are too difficult because you might not appreciate either the obstacles in the way, or understand quite how much skill you need to develop to achieve a particular level of performance.

Achieving Goals
When you've achieved a goal, take the time to enjoy the satisfaction of having done so. Absorb the implications of the goal achievement, and observe the progress that you've made towards other goals.

If the goal was a significant one, reward yourself appropriately. All of this helps you build the self-confidence you deserve.

With the experience of having achieved this goal, review the rest of your goal plans:

If you achieved the goal too easily, make your next goal harder.
If the goal took a dispiriting length of time to achieve, make the next goal a little easier.
If you learned something that would lead you to change other goals, do so.
If you noticed a deficit in your skills despite achieving the goal, decide whether to set goals to fix this.
Tip 1:
Our article, Golden Rules of Goal Setting , will show you how to set yourself up for success when it comes to your goals. If you're still having trouble, you might also want to try Backward Goal Setting .

Tip 2:
It's important to remember that failing to meet goals does not matter much, just as long as you learn from the experience.

Feed lessons you have learned back into the process of setting your next goals. Remember too that your goals will change as time goes on. Adjust them regularly to reflect growth in your knowledge and experience, and if goals do not hold any attraction any longer, consider letting them go.

Example Personal Goals
For her New Year's Resolution, Susan has decided to think about what she really wants to do with her life.

Her lifetime goals are as follows:

Career – "To be managing editor of the magazine that I work for."
Artistic – "To keep working on my illustration skills. Ultimately I want to have my own show in our downtown gallery."
Physical – "To run a marathon."
Now that Susan has listed her lifetime goals, she then breaks down each one into smaller, more manageable goals.

Let's take a closer look at how she might break down her lifetime career goal – becoming managing editor of her magazine:

Five-year goal: "Become deputy editor."
One-year goal: "Volunteer for projects that the current Managing Editor is heading up."
Six-month goal: "Go back to school and finish my journalism degree."
One-month goal: "Talk to the current managing editor to determine what skills are needed to do the job."
One-week goal: "Book the meeting with the Managing Editor."
As you can see from this example, breaking big goals down into smaller, more manageable goals makes it far easier to see how the goal will get accomplished.

Key Points
Goal setting is an important method for:

Deciding what you want to achieve in your life.
Separating what's important from what's irrelevant, or a distraction.
Motivating yourself.
Building your self-confidence, based on successful achievement of goals.
Set your lifetime goals first. Then, set a five-year plan of smaller goals that you need to complete if you are to reach your lifetime plan. Keep the process going by regularly reviewing and updating your goals. And remember to take time to enjoy the satisfaction of achieving your goals when you do so.

If you don't already set goals, do so, starting now. As you make this technique part of your life, you'll find your career accelerating, and you'll wonder how you did without it!

This site teaches you the skills you need for a happy and successful career; and this is just one of many tools and resources that you'll find here at Mind Tools. Subscribe to our free newsletter, or join the Mind Tools Club and really supercharge your career!

Add this article to My Learning PlanHide Ratings
Ratings
Rate this resource

Free login needed. Login / Create Log in.
SarahLovell1_ 2022-08-05 20:01:11

This is perfectly presented in bite-size pieces of information.

MohamedMR 2022-04-27 14:55:50

JustinLeslieMcgowan1971 2022-03-31 00:50:08

wwa024 2022-01-10 08:18:34

Info_Rtg9535 2021-12-31 21:03:18

123…175
Free Time Management Workbook Offer
Get unlimited access to all our career tools, community and career coaches - plus this 40-page time management toolkit FREE when you become a member of the Mind Tools Club before Aug 22!

Get the Free Workbook
Join the Mind Tools ClubSign up for our FREE newsletter
Comments (293)
Write your message…
Over a month ago
Yolande wrote
Hello blackpooljane,

What a lovely message from you - thanks for sharing that with us!

I agree - getting your goals, process, and progress on paper is extremely powerful. I feel that it gives me a different perspective on my own decisions etc. - it's almost as if the "distance" that the journal affords me from my own brain and mind, helps me to be more objective.
It's also interesting to see, if you read back in your own journal, how much you've grown and what your different thought processes were.

Writing down your achievements is a wonderful idea - it's motivating and inspiring. Well done!

Please come and say "hello" on the forums too - we'd love to hear your voice over there too: https://www.mindtools.com/forums/viewforum.php?f=2

Yolande,
Mind Tools Team
Over a month ago
blackpooljane wrote
This really does work. I started journalling every day and managed to figure out how to relocate away from a job I wasn't enjoying and move back home to the seaside. It seemed such an insurmountable task but by breaking it down into smaller chunks - and breaking down barriers - I did it sooner than anticipated. Also at the end of every month I wrote down everything I had achieved that month and it was always a page full of things (e.g. resolving a particular conflict, changing my wardrobe to gain confidence, passing an exam).
Over a month ago
Midgie wrote
Hi nana9,
Thanks for sharing your experience and I agree that by setting smaller goals can help you take those baby steps towards your bigger goal.

Midgie
Mind Tools TeamView All Comments
Previous ArticleNext Article
Get the Free Newsletter
Get the Free Newsletter
Learn new career skills every week, plus get a bonus Time Management workbook, free! 

First name
Email
Read our Privacy Policy

Take Control of Your Time
Download this popular 40-page workbook for FREE when you become a Club member before Aug 22.

Join Mind Tools

Allow Your Team to Learn From Home
Discover Mind Tools for Business - empowering everyone in your organization to thrive at work with access to learning when they need it. 

Find Out More
RELATED RESOURCES
From Mind Tools
The Wheel of Life®
How Good Is Your Goal Setting?
SIGN UP
To provide feedback
User Research
We're always striving to improve your experience on the platform and we'd love to hear your feedback on some new and existing designs.

Sign up here and get invited to participate in our user research!

SPONSORED LINKS
Please accept the cookie consent
Toolkit
Leadership Skills (60)
Team Management (310)
Strategy Tools (144)
Problem Solving (47)
Decision Making (57)
Project Management (65)
Time Management (64)
Stress Management (76)
Communication Skills (150)
Creativity Tools (29)
Learning Skills (56)
Career Skills (212)
My Learning Plan
emerald works logo
Facebook logo
Twitter logo
LinkedIn logo
YouTube logo
About Mind Tools
About Mind Tools
Join Mind Tools
Mind Tools Content
Club Member Stories
FAQs
Contact Us
Careers
Newsletter
Newsletter Sign Up
Store
Mind Tools Store
Corporate Solutions
Corporate Solutions
Emerald Works
Legal
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
Acceptable Use Policy
Cookies
Permissions
Accessibility
© Emerald Works Limited 2022. All rights reserved. "Mind Tools" is a registered trademark of Emerald Works Limited.
Cookie consent
This website uses cookies that help the website to function and also to track how you interact with our website. But for us to provide the best user experience, enable the specific cookies from Settings, and click on Accept.Read More



