Analytics and Reporting Solutions provide all the configuration records required to analyze default applications. Customize these records for use in your production environment. For more information, see Configure Analytics and Reporting Solutions.

Required Performance Analytics entitlement
To enable an Analytics and Reporting Solution, you must be entitled to use Performance Analytics with the relevant ServiceNow product. For example, to enable the Customer Service Management - Advanced Analytics and Reporting Solution, you must be entitled to use Performance Analytics for Customer Service Management.

Analytics and Reporting Solutions that do not contain any Performance Analytics components do not require a Performance Analytics entitlement.

Available Analytics and Reporting Solutions
The following Analytics and Reporting Solutions are available for their corresponding ServiceNow Performance Analytics entitlements. The solutions are at no extra charge, but the underlying applications require appropriate licensing.

ServiceNow Store applications with Performance Analytics content
The following applications on the ServiceNow® Store include Performance Analytics components, such as a dashboard showing widgets for indicators.

Activate a Solution using guided setup
If a product has a Performance Analytics guided setup, use that guided setup to activate and configure the associated Analytics and Reporting solution quickly and consistently.

Install a dashboard
Use the Solution Library to install a dashboard and all its associated visualizations such as widgets and reports, and to configure existing dashboards.

Configure Analytics and Reporting Solutions
Analytics and Reporting Solutions come configured with the expectation that you keep your Now Platform data in a standard set of tables and fields. If you are using different fields, configure the Solutions to point to the correct locations.

Collect data for Analytics and Reporting Solutions
After you install an Analytics and Reporting Solution and ensure that it points at the correct data structures in your instance, collect the data for the indicators and breakdowns.
